
4G
Mobile services based on 4G LTE services are
steadily expanding across global markets, providing
subscribers with the type of responsive Internet
browsing experience that previously was only
possible on wired broadband connections.


Today, 3G/4G network performance is
evaluated on “hard” metrics, including peak data
rates, coverage, and spectral efficiency. The 5G
Era will see expanded performance metrics centered
on the user’s quality of experience (QoE),
including factors such as ease of connectivity
with nearby devices and improved energy efficiency.
5G networks will offer a more user-centric
and context-aware experience, delivering
personalized content and assistance services. 5G
network elements will need to cooperate in


What is more, the Internet of Things concept
contemplates a world where everything from
alarm clocks to washing machines to automobiles
is connected through mobile-based
machine-to-machine (M2M) communications.
Maintaining an optimum user experience in such
a complex network environment will require
closely coordinated RAT selection and management
at both the network and device levels.
In short, the 5G Era will achieve these needed
improvements in network and service performance
and efficiency by providing a technology
framework where networks, devices, and applications
are co-optimized.


Today’s 3G and 4G networks are designed primarily
with a focus on peak rate and spectral
efficiency improvements. In the 5G Era, we will
see a shift towards network efficiency with 5G
systems based on dense HetNet architectures.
HetNets are among the most promising low-cost
approaches to meet the industry’s capacity
growth needs and deliver a uniform connectivity
experience.


In addition to small cells, client devices will
become an integral part of the 5G Era network.
Together, small cells and D2D communication
will form a new underlay tier of low-cost infrastructure
that complements the coverage and
capacity of conventional cellular networks.
Cost and flexibility of deployment will also



In 5G HetNets, macro and small cells may be
connected to each other via ideal or non-ideal
backhaul, resulting in different levels of coordination
across the network for mobility and interference
management. Increasing degrees of
network cooperation, from loose network node
coordination to completely centralized control,
will provide increasing levels of network capacity.


The aggressive spectral reuse envisioned with
dense HetNet architectures will not be realizable
without advanced interference management to
control the resulting network interference. 5G
systems will need to manage such interference
through cooperation across densely deployed
small cells and end-user devices to provide an
“edgeless” experience to mobile users.



Looking beyond network improvements, the
mobile industry’s transition from 4G to 5G will
require devices capable of taking a greater role
in sharing contextual information and managing
all the aforementioned connections. In the years
to come, devices — such as the one illustrated
conceptually in Fig. 2 — will evolve in size, form,
and function, but they will not leave the past

Even as 5G services eventually achieve
global deployment and availability, legacy 4G and
3G networks will continue to operate on a
widespread basis for many years.


baseband capabilities for 3G, 4G, and 5G technologies
will arise in the domain of interference
management. From the perspective of network
capacity, this intersection will require devices to
autonomously identify, characterize (interferer
modulation and spatial multiplexing mode), and
suppress co-channel interference from other
cells, as well as suppress increasing levels of inband
interference from other devices operating
in D2D modes such as WiFi and LTE Direct, or
their 5G equivalents. Such sources of interference
external to the device will be exacerbated
by self-interference, and by the needs to: operate
in multiple aggregated bands, operate multiple
RATs simultaneously (including a 5G RAT),
share antennas between RATs, manage the
resulting coexistence scenarios, and relax the
requirements and complexity of multi-band passive
radio front-ends (RFEs). As a result, and in
addition



5G Era devices will increasingly support a
rich array of device location capabilities. These
capabilities will range from processing, with
ephemeris assistance data, an ever-maturing set
of GPS and GLONASS satellites to include the
Beidou, Galileo, and even IRNSS constellations.
They will also require support for new frequency
bands (e.g., the GPS L2, L5 bands) and new
codes and pilot signals that will require 3G-like
channel and time-delay estimation and intra-
GNSS interference suppression. Critically,
Figure 2. Device technologies for 5G era.



5G systems will need to provide significant
improvement in cell capacity to accommodate
the rapidly increasing traffic demands. Although
5G will introduce a bevy of new technologies
that enable networks and devices to make better
use of scarce spectrum resources, more efficient
use of current spectrum resources will not be
sufficient to keep pace with the mobile data
usage increase. 5G systems are expected to provide
data rates on the order of gigabits per second,
anytime and anywhere. This could only be
realized with much more spectrum than that currently
available to IMT2 systems through the
International Telecommunication Union’s (ITU)
process.




As the mobile industry continues its efforts to
open new technological frontiers, governments
worldwide can also play a role in meeting growing
data demand by adopting sensible, innovative,
and technology-neutral spectrum policies to
facilitate more efficient use of spectrum, and
thus create new economic opportunities.
The combination of network innovations, new
device capabilities, and support from key ecosystem
stakeholders will help pave the road to 5G,
and will progressively enrich our mobile user
experience throughout the 5G Era.